---
title: Blockwise transfers in CoAP
# abbrev: CoAP-Block
docname: draft-ietf-core-block-05
date: 2012-01-13

ipr: trust200902
area: Applications
wg: CoRE Working Group
kw: Internet-Draft
cat: std

coding: us-ascii
pi:
        - toc
        - sortrefs
        - symrefs

author:
      -
        ins: C. Bormann
        name: Carsten Bormann
        org: Universitaet Bremen TZI
        # abbrev: TZI
        # street:
        # - Postfach 330440
        # - Bibliothekstr. 1
        street: Postfach 330440
        city: Bremen
        code: D-28359
        country: Germany
        phone: +49-421-218-63921
        facsimile: +49-421-218-7000
        email: cabo@tzi.org
      -
        ins: Z. Shelby
        name: Zach Shelby
        org: Sensinode
        role: editor
        street: Kidekuja 2
        city: Vuokatti
        code: 88600
        country: Finland
        phone: "+358407796297"
        email: zach@sensinode.com
bibxml:
        - rfc2119
        - rfc2616
        - I-D.ietf-core-coap
entity:
        SELF: "[RFCXXXX]"

# --- note_IESG_Note
#
# bla bla bla

--- abstract


CoAP is a RESTful transfer protocol for constrained nodes and networks.
Basic CoAP messages work well for the small payloads we expect
from temperature sensors, light switches, and similar
building-automation devices.
Occasionally, however, applications will need to transfer
larger payloads --- for instance, for firmware updates. With
HTTP, TCP does the grunt work of slicing large payloads up
into multiple packets and ensuring that they all arrive and
are handled in the right order.

CoAP is based on datagram transports such as UDP or DTLS,
which limits the maximum size of resource representations that
can be transferred without too much fragmentation.
Although UDP supports larger payloads through IP
fragmentation, it is limited to 64 KiB and, more importantly,
doesn't really work well for constrained applications and
networks.

Instead of relying on IP fragmentation, this specification
extends basic CoAP with a pair of "Block" options, for
transferring multiple blocks of information from a resource
representation in multiple request-response pairs. In many
important cases, the Block options enable a server to be truly
stateless: the server can handle each block transfer
separately, with no need for a connection setup or other
server-side memory of previous block transfers.

In summary, the Block options provide a minimal way to
transfer larger representations in a block-wise fashion.


--- informative-

<reference anchor="REST">
  <front>
    <title>Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based Software Architectures</title>
    <author initials="R" surname="Fielding" fullname="Roy Fielding">
      <organization>University of California, Irvine</organization>
    </author>
    <date year="2000" />
  </front>
</reference>

--- middle

Introduction        {#problems}
============

The CoRE WG is tasked with standardizing an
Application Protocol for Constrained Networks/Nodes, CoAP.
This protocol is intended to provide RESTful {{REST}} services not
unlike HTTP {{RFC2616}},
while reducing the complexity of implementation as well as the size of
packets exchanged in order to make these services useful in a highly
constrained network of themselves highly constrained nodes.

--- normative-
&RFC2616;
---

This objective requires restraint in a number of sometimes conflicting ways:

- reducing implementation complexity in order to minimize code size,
- reducing message sizes in order to minimize the number of fragments
  needed for each message (in turn to maximize the probability of
  delivery of the message), the amount of transmission power needed
  and the loading of the limited-bandwidth channel,
- reducing requirements on the environment such as stable storage,
  good sources of randomness or user interaction capabilities.

CoAP is based on datagram transports such as UDP, which limit the
maximum size of resource representations that can be transferred
without creating unreasonable levels of IP fragmentation.  In
addition, not all resource representations will fit into a single link
layer packet of a constrained network, which may cause adaptation
layer fragmentation even if IP layer fragmentation is not required.
Using fragmentation (either at the adaptation layer or at the IP
layer) to enable the transport of larger representations is possible
up to the maximum size of the underlying datagram protocol (such as
UDP), but the fragmentation/reassembly process loads the lower layers
with conversation state that is better managed in the application
layer.

This specification defines a pair of CoAP options to enable *block-wise* access to
resource representations.
The Block options provide a minimal way to transfer larger
resource representations in a block-wise fashion.
The overriding objective is to avoid
creating conversation state at the server for block-wise GET requests.
(It is impossible to fully avoid creating conversation state for
POST/PUT, if the creation/replacement of resources is to be atomic;
where that property is not needed, there is no need to create server
conversation state in this case, either.)


In summary, this specification adds a pair of Block options to CoAP that
can be used for block-wise transfers.  Benefits of using these options
include:

* Transfers larger than can be accommodated in constrained-network
  link-layer packets can be performed in smaller blocks.
* No hard-to-manage conversation state is created at the adaptation
  layer or IP layer for fragmentation.
* The transfer of each block is acknowledged, enabling retransmission
  if required.
* Both sides have a say in the block size that actually will be used.
* The resulting exchanges are easy to understand using packet
  analyzer tools and thus quite accessible to debugging.
* If needed, the Block options can also be used as is to provide random
  access to power-of-two sized blocks within a resource representation.

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119, BCP 14
{{RFC2119}} and indicate requirement levels for compliant CoAP
implementations.

--- normative-
&RFC2119;
---

In this document, the term "byte" is used in its now customary sense
as a synonym for "octet".

Where bit arithmetic is explained, this document uses the notation
familiar from the programming language C, except that the operator "\*\*"
stands for exponentiation.

Block-wise transfers
====================

As discussed in the introduction, there are good reasons to limit the
size datagrams in constrained networks:

* by the maximum datagram size (~ 64 KiB for UDP)
* by the desire to avoid IP fragmentation (MTU of 1280 for IPv6)
* by the desire to avoid adaptation layer fragmentation (60--80 bytes
  for 6LoWPAN)

When a resource representation is larger than can be comfortably
transferred in the payload of a single CoAP datagram, a Block option
can be used to indicate a block-wise transfer.  As payloads can be
sent both with requests and with responses, this specification
provides two separate options for each direction of payload transfer.

In the following, the term "payload" will be used for the actual
content of a single CoAP message, i.e. a single block being
transferred, while the term "body" will be used for the entire
resource representation that is being transferred in a block-wise
fashion.

In most cases, all blocks being transferred for a body will be of the
same size.  The block size is not fixed by the protocol.  To keep the
implementation as simple as possible, the Block options support only a
small range of power-of-two block sizes, from 2\*\*4 (16) to 2\*\*10
(1024) bytes.  As bodies often will not evenly divide into the
power-of-two block size chosen, the size need not be reached in the
final block; still this size will be given as the block size even for
the final block.

The Block Options  {#block-option}
----------------

| Type | C/E      | Name   | Format | Length | Default       |
|------:+----------+--------+--------+--------+---------------|
|   19 | Critical | Block1 | uint   | 1-3 B  | 0 (see below) |
|   17 | Critical | Block2 | uint   | 1-3 B  | 0 (see below) |
{: #block-option-numbers title="Block Option Numbers"}

Both Block1 and Block2 options can be present both in request and
response messages.  In either case, the Block1 Option pertains to the
request payload, and the Block2 Option pertains to the response payload.

Hence, for the methods defined in {{I-D.ietf-core-coap}}, Block1 is
useful with the payload-bearing POST and PUT requests and their
responses.  Block2 is useful with GET, POST, and PUT requests and
their payload-bearing responses (2.01, 2.02, 2.04, 2.05 --- see
section "Payload" of {{I-D.ietf-core-coap}}).

--- normative-
&I-D.ietf-core-coap;
---

(As a memory aid: Block_1_ pertains to the payload of the _1st_ part
of the request-response exchange, i.e. the request, and Block_2_
pertains to the payload of the _2nd_ part of the request-response
exchange, i.e. the response.)

Where Block1 is present in a request or Block2 in a response (i.e., in
that message to the payload of which it pertains) it indicates a
block-wise transfer and describes how this block-wise payload forms
part of the entire body being transferred ("descriptive usage").
Where it is present in the opposite direction, it provides additional
control on how that payload will be formed or was processed ("control usage").

Implementation of either Block option is intended to be optional.
However, when it is present in a CoAP message, it MUST be processed
(or the message rejected);
therefore it is identified as a critical option.

Three items of information may need to be transferred in a Block
option:

* The size of the block (SZX);
* whether more blocks are following (M);
* the relative number of the block (NUM) within a sequence of blocks
  with the given size.

The value of the option is a 1-, 2- or 3-byte integer which encodes
these three fields, see {{block}}.

            0
            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
           +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
           |  NUM  |M| SZX |
           +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

            0                   1
            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5
           +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
           |          NUM          |M| SZX |
           +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+

            0                   1                   2
            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3
           +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
           |                   NUM                 |M| SZX |
           +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
{: #block title="Block option value"}


The block size is encoded as a three-bit unsigned integer (0 for 2\*\*4 to 6
for 2\*\*10 bytes), which we call the `SZX` (size exponent); the
actual block size is then `2**(SZX + 4)`.  SZX is transferred in the
three least significant bits of the option value (i.e., `val & 7`
where `val` is the value of the option).

The fourth least significant bit, the M or "more" bit (`val & 8`),
indicates whether more blocks are following or the current block-wise
transfer is the last block being transferred.

The option value divided by sixteen (the NUM field) is the sequence
number of the block currently being transferred, starting from
zero. The current transfer is therefore about the `size` bytes
starting at byte `NUM << (SZX + 4)`.  (Note that, as an implementation
convenience, `(val & ~0xF) << (val & 7)`, i.e. the option value with
the last 4 bits masked out, shifted to the left by the value of SZX,
gives the byte position of the block.)

The default value of both the Block1 and the Block2 Option is zero,
indicating that the current block is the first and only block of the
transfer (block number 0, M bit not set); however, there is no
explicit size implied by this default value.

More specifically, within the option value of a Block1 or Block2
Option, the meaning of the option fields is defined as follows:

NUM:
: Block Number. The block number is a variable-size (4, 12, or 20 bit)
  unsigned integer (uint, see Appendix A of {{I-D.ietf-core-coap}})
  indicating the block number being requested or provided. Block
  number 0 indicates the first block of a body.

M:
: More Flag (not last block). For descriptive usage, this flag, if
  unset, indicates that the payload in this message is the last block
  in the body; when set it indicates that there are one or more
  additional blocks available.  When a Block2 Option is used in a
  request to retrieve a specific block number ("control usage"), the M
  bit MUST be sent as zero and ignored on reception.  (In a Block1
  Option in a response, the M flag is used to indicate atomicity, see
  below.)

SZX:
:  Block Size. The block size is a three-bit unsigned integer indicating the size of a block to
  the power of two. Thus block size = 2\*\*(SZX + 4).  The allowed
  values of SZX are 0 to 6, i.e., the minimum block size is 2\*\*(0+4) = 16
  and the maximum is 2\*\*(6+4) = 1024.
  The value 7 for SZX (which would indicate a block size of 2048) is
  reserved, i.e. MUST NOT be sent and MUST lead to a 4.00 Bad Request
  response code upon reception in a request.

The Block options are used in one of three roles:

- In descriptive usage, i.e. a Block2 Option in a response (e.g., a
  2.05 response for GET), or a Block1 Option in a request (e.g., PUT
  or POST):
  - The NUM field in the option value describes what block number is
    contained in the payload of this message.
  - The M bit indicates whether further
    blocks are required to complete the transfer of that body.
  - The block size given by SZX MUST match the size of the payload in
    bytes, if the M bit is set. (The block size given is irrelevant if
    M is unset).  For Block2, if the request suggested a larger value
    of SZX, the next request MUST move SZX down to the size given
    here.  (The effect is that, if the server uses the smaller of its
    preferred block size and the one requested, all blocks for a body
    use the same block size.)

- A Block2 Option in control usage in a request (e.g., GET):
  - The NUM field in the Block2 Option gives the block number of the
    payload that is being requested to be returned in the response.
  - In this case, the M bit has no function and MUST be set to zero.
  - The block size given (SZX) suggests a block size (in the case of
    block number 0) or repeats the block size of previous blocks
    received (in the case of block numbers other than 0).

- A Block1 Option in control usage in a response (e.g., a 2.xx
  response for a PUT or POST request):
  - The NUM field of the Block1 Option indicates what block number is
    being acknowledged.
  - If the M bit was set in the request, the server can choose whether
    to act on each block separately, with no memory, or whether to
    handle the request for the entire body atomically, or any mix of
    the two.  If the M bit is also set in the response, it indicates
    that this response does not carry the final response code to the
    request, i.e. the server collects further blocks and plans to
    implement the request atomically (e.g., acts only upon reception
    of the last block of payload).  Conversely, if the M bit is unset
    even though it was set in the request, it indicates the block-wise
    request was enacted now specifically for this block, and the
    response carries the final response to this request (and to any
    previous ones with the M bit set in the response's Block1 Option
    in this sequence of block-wise transfers); the client is still
    expected to continue sending further blocks, the request method
    for which may or may not also be enacted per-block.
  - Finally, the SZX block size given in a control Block1 Option
    indicates the largest block size preferred by the server for
    transfers toward the resource that is the same or smaller than the
    one used in the initial exchange; the client SHOULD use this block
    size or a smaller one in all further requests in the transfer
    sequence, even if that means changing the block size (and possibly
    scaling the block number accordingly) from now on.

Using the Block Options    {#block-usage}
-----------------------

Using one or both Block options, a single REST operation can be split
into multiple CoAP message exchanges.  As specified in
{{I-D.ietf-core-coap}}, each of these message exchanges uses their own
CoAP Message ID.

When a request is answered with a response carrying a Block2 Option with
the M bit set, the requester may retrieve additional blocks of the
resource representation by sending further
requests with the same options and a Block2 Option giving the block
number and block size desired.  In a request, the client MUST set the M bit of a Block2 Option
to zero and the server MUST ignore it on reception.

To influence the block size used in a response, the
requester also uses the Block2 Option, giving the desired size, a block
number of zero and an M bit of zero.  A server MUST use the block
size indicated or a smaller size.  Any further block-wise requests for
blocks beyond the first one MUST indicate the same block size that was
used by the server in the
response for the first request that gave a desired size using a Block2
Option.

Once the Block2 Option is used by the requester, all requests in a
single block-wise transfer
MUST ultimately use the same size, except that there may not be enough
content to fill the last block (the one returned with the M bit not
set).
(Note that the client may start using the Block2 Option in a second
request after a first request without a Block2 Option resulted in a
Block option in the response.)
The server SHOULD use the block
size indicated in the request option or a smaller size, but the
requester MUST take note of the actual block size used in the response
it receives
to its initial request and proceed to use it in subsequent requests. The
server behavior MUST ensure that this client behavior results in the
same block size for all responses in a sequence (except for the last
one with the M bit not set, and possibly the first one if the initial
request did not contain a Block2 Option).

Block-wise transfers can be used to GET resources the representations
of which are entirely static (not changing over time at all, such as
in a schema describing a device), or for dynamically changing
resources.  In the latter case, the Block2 Option SHOULD be used in
conjunction with the ETag Option, to ensure that the blocks being
reassembled are from the same version of the representation: The
server SHOULD include an ETag option in each response.  If an ETag
option is available, the client's reassembler, when reassembling the
representation from the blocks being exchanged, MUST compare ETag
Options.  If the ETag Options do not match in a GET transfer, the
requester has the option of attempting to retrieve fresh values for
the blocks it retrieved first.  To minimize the resulting
inefficiency, the server MAY cache the current value of a
representation for an ongoing sequence of requests.  The client MAY
facilitate identifying the sequence by using the Token Option with a
non-default value.  Note well that this specification makes no
requirement for the server to establish any state; however, servers
that offer quickly changing resources may thereby make it impossible
for a client to ever retrieve a consistent set of blocks.

In a request with a request payload (e.g., PUT or POST), the Block1
Option refers to the payload in the request (descriptive usage).

In response to a request with a payload (e.g., a PUT or POST
transfer), the block size given in the Block1 Option indicates the
block size preference of the server for this resource (control usage).
Obviously, at this point the first block has already been transferred
by the client without benefit of this knowledge.  Still, the client
SHOULD heed the preference and, for all further blocks, use the block
size preferred by the server or a smaller one.  Note that any
reduction in the block size may mean that the second request starts
with a block number larger than one, as the first request already
transferred multiple blocks as counted in the smaller size.

To counter the effects of adaptation layer fragmentation on packet
delivery probability, a client may want to give up retransmitting a
request with a relatively large payload even before MAX_RETRANSMIT has
been reached, and try restating the request as a block-wise transfer
with a smaller payload.  Note that this new attempt is then a new
message-layer transaction and requires a new Message ID.
(Because of the uncertainty whether the request or the acknowledgement
was lost, this strategy is useful mostly for idempotent requests.)

In a blockwise transfer of a request payload (e.g., a PUT or POST) that is intended to be implemented in an
atomic fashion at the server, the actual creation/replacement takes
place at the time the final block, i.e. a block with the M bit unset
in the Block1 Option, is received.  If not
all previous blocks are available at the server at this time, the
transfer fails and error code 4.08 (Request Entity Incomplete) MUST be returned.  The error
code 4.13 (Request Entity Too Large) can be returned at any time by a server that does not
currently have the resources to store blocks for a block-wise request payload transfer that it would intend to implement in an atomic fashion.

If multiple concurrently proceeding block-wise request payload
transfer (e.g., PUT or POST) operations
are possible, the requester SHOULD use the Token Option to clearly separate the different sequences.
In this case, when reassembling the representation from the blocks
being exchanged to enable atomic processing, the reassembler MUST
compare any Token Options present (and, as usual, taking an absent Token Option
to default to the empty Token).
If atomic processing is not desired, there is no need to process the
Token Option (but it is still returned in the response as usual).

Examples
========

This section gives a number of short examples with message flows for a
block-wise GET, and for a PUT or POST.
These examples demonstrate the basic operation, the operation in the
presence of retransmissions, and examples for the operation of the
block size negotiation.

In all these examples, a Block option is shown in a decomposed way
separating the kind of Block option (1 or 2), block number (NUM), more bit (M), and block size exponent
(2\*\*(SZX+4)) by slashes.  E.g., a Block2 Option value of 33 would be shown as
2/2/0/32), or a Block1 Option value of 59 would be shown as 1/3/1/128.

The first example ({{simple-get}}) shows a GET request that is split
into three blocks.
The server proposes a block size of 128, and the client agrees.
The first two ACKs contain 128 bytes of payload each, and third ACK
contains between 1 and 128 bytes.

~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                            |
  | CON [MID=1234], GET, /status                       ------> |
  |                                                            |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.05 Content, 2/0/1/128          |
  |                                                            |
  | CON [MID=1235], GET, /status, 2/1/0/128            ------> |
  |                                                            |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.05 Content, 2/1/1/128          |
  |                                                            |
  | CON [MID=1236], GET, /status, 2/2/0/128            ------> |
  |                                                            |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1236], 2.05 Content, 2/2/0/128          |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #simple-get title="Simple blockwise GET"}


In the second example ({{early-get}}), the client anticipates the blockwise transfer
(e.g., because of a size indication in the link-format description)
and sends a size proposal.  All ACK messages except for the last carry
64 bytes of payload; the last one carries between 1 and 64 bytes.


~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1234], GET, /status, 2/0/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.05 Content, 2/0/1/64         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], GET, /status, 2/1/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.05 Content, 2/1/1/64         |
  :                                                          :
  :                          ...                             :
  :                                                          :
  | CON [MID=1238], GET, /status, 2/4/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1238], 2.05 Content, 2/4/1/64         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1239], GET, /status, 2/5/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1239], 2.05 Content, 2/5/0/64         |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #early-get title="Blockwise GET with early negotiation" }

In the third example ({{late-get}}), the client is surprised by the
need for a blockwise transfer, and unhappy with the size chosen
unilaterally by the server.  As it did not send a size proposal
initially, the negotiation only influences the size from the second
message exchange onward.  Since the client already obtained both the first and
second 64-byte block in the first 128-byte exchange, it goes on
requesting the third 64-byte block ("2/0/64").  None of this is (or
needs to be) understood by the server, which simply responds to the
requests as it best can.


~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1234], GET, /status                     ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.05 Content, 2/0/1/128        |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], GET, /status, 2/2/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.05 Content, 2/2/1/64         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1236], GET, /status, 2/3/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1236], 2.05 Content, 2/3/1/64         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1237], GET, /status, 2/4/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1237], 2.05 Content, 2/4/1/64         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1238], GET, /status, 2/5/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1238], 2.05 Content, 2/5/0/64         |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #late-get title="Blockwise GET with late negotiation" }

In all these (and the following) cases, retransmissions are handled by
the CoAP message exchange layer, so they don't influence the block
operations ({{late-get-lost-con}}, {{late-get-lost-ack}}).


~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1234], GET, /status                     ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.05 Content, 2/0/1/128        |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], GE/////////////////////////              |
  |                                                          |
  | (timeout)                                                |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], GET, /status, 2/2/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.05 Content, 2/2/1/64         |
  :                                                          :
  :                          ...                             :
  :                                                          :
  | CON [MID=1238], GET, /status, 2/5/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1238], 2.05 Content, 2/5/0/64         |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #late-get-lost-con title="Blockwise GET with late negotiation and
  lost CON" }


~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1234], GET, /status                     ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.05 Content, 2/0/1/128        |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], GET, /status, 2/2/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | //////////////////////////////////tent, 2/2/1/64         |
  |                                                          |
  | (timeout)                                                |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], GET, /status, 2/2/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.05 Content, 2/2/1/64         |
  :                                                          :
  :                          ...                             :
  :                                                          :
  | CON [MID=1238], GET, /status, 2/5/0/64           ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1238], 2.05 Content, 2/5/0/64         |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #late-get-lost-ack title="Blockwise GET with late negotiation and
  lost ACK" }

The following examples demonstrate a PUT exchange; a POST exchange
looks the same, with different requirements on atomicity/idempotence.
To ensure that the blocks relate to the same version of the resource
representation carried in the request, the client in
{{simple-put-atomic}} sets the Token to
"v17" in all requests.  Note that, as with the GET, the responses to
the requests that have a more bit in the request Block2 Option are
provisional; only the final response tells the client that the PUT
succeeded.


~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1234], PUT, /options, v17, 1/0/1/128    ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.04 Changed, 1/0/1/128        |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], PUT, /options, v17, 1/1/1/128    ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.04 Changed, 1/1/1/128        |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1236], PUT, /options, v17, 1/2/0/128    ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1236], 2.04 Changed, 1/2/0/128        |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #simple-put-atomic title="Simple atomic blockwise PUT" }

A stateless server that simply builds/updates the resource in place
(statelessly) may indicate this by not setting the more bit in the
response ({{simple-put-stateless}}); in this case, the response codes are valid separately for
each block being updated.  This is of course only an acceptable
behavior of the server if the potential inconsistency present during
the run of the message exchange sequence does not lead to problems,
e.g. because the resource being created or changed is not yet or not currently in
use.


~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1234], PUT, /options, v17, 1/0/1/128    ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.04 Changed, 1/0/0/128        |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], PUT, /options, v17, 1/1/1/128    ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.04 Changed, 1/1/0/128        |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1236], PUT, /options, v17, 1/2/0/128    ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1236], 2.04 Changed, 1/2/0/128        |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #simple-put-stateless title="Simple stateless blockwise PUT" }

Finally, a server receiving a blockwise PUT or POST may want to indicate a
smaller block size preference ({{simple-put-atomic-nego}}).
In this case, the client SHOULD continue with a smaller block size; if
it does, it MUST adjust the block number to properly count in that smaller size.



~~~~~~~~~~~
CLIENT                                                     SERVER
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1234], PUT, /options, v17, 1/0/1/128    ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1234], 2.04 Changed, 1/0/1/32         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1235], PUT, /options, v17, 1/4/1/32     ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.04 Changed, 1/4/1/32         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1236], PUT, /options, v17, 1/5/1/32     ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1235], 2.04 Changed, 1/5/1/32         |
  |                                                          |
  | CON [MID=1237], PUT, /options, v17, 1/6/0/32     ------> |
  |                                                          |
  | <------   ACK [MID=1236], 2.04 Changed, 1/6/0/32         |
~~~~~~~~~~~
{: #simple-put-atomic-nego title="Simple atomic blockwise PUT with
negotiation" }


HTTP Mapping Considerations {#http-mapping}
===========================


In this subsection, we give some brief examples for the influence the
Block options might have on intermediaries that map between CoAP and
HTTP.

For mapping CoAP requests to HTTP, the intermediary may want to map
the sequence of block-wise transfers into a single HTTP transfer.
E.g., for a GET request, the intermediary could perform the HTTP
request once the first block has been requested and could then fulfill
all further block requests out of its cache.
A constrained implementation may not be able to cache the entire
object and may use a combination of TCP flow control and (in
particular if timeouts occur) HTTP range requests to obtain the
information necessary for the next block transfer at the right time.

For PUT or POST requests, there is more variation in how HTTP servers
might implement ranges.  Some WebDAV servers do, but in general the
CoAP-to-HTTP intermediary will have to try sending the payload of all
the blocks of a block-wise transfer within one HTTP request.  If
enough buffering is available, this request can be started when the
last CoAP block is received.  A constrained implementation may want to
relieve its buffering by already starting to send the HTTP request at
the time the first CoAP block is received; any HTTP 408 status code
that indicates that the HTTP server became impatient with the
resulting transfer can then be mapped into a CoAP 4.08 response code
(similarly, 413 maps to 4.13).

For mapping HTTP to CoAP, the intermediary may want to map a single
HTTP transfer into a sequence of block-wise transfers.
If the HTTP client is too slow delivering a request body on a PUT or
POST, the CoAP server might time out and return a 4.08
response code, which in turn maps well to an HTTP 408 status code
(again, 4.13 maps to 413).
HTTP range requests received on the HTTP side may be served out of a
cache and/or mapped to GET
requests that request a sequence of blocks overlapping the range.

(Note that, while the semantics of CoAP 4.08 and HTTP 408 differ, this
difference is largely due to the different way the two protocols are
mapped to transport.  HTTP has an underlying TCP connection, which
supplies connection state, so a HTTP 408 status code can immediately
be used to indicate that a timeout occurred during transmitting a
request through that active TCP connection.
The CoAP 4.08 response code indicates one or more missing blocks,
which may be due to timeouts or resource constraints; as there is no
connection state, there is no way to deliver such a response
immediately; instead, it is delivered on the next block transfer.
Still, HTTP 408 is probably the best mapping back to HTTP, as the
timeout is the most likely cause for a CoAP 4.08.
Note that there is no way to distinguish a timeout from a missing
block for a server without creating additional state, the need for
which we want to avoid.)


IANA Considerations
===================

This draft adds the following option numbers to the CoAP Option
Numbers registry of
{{I-D.ietf-core-coap}}:

| Number | Name   | Reference |
|-------:+--------+----------- |
|     17 | Block2 | {{&SELF}} |
|     19 | Block1 | {{&SELF}} |
{: #tab-option-registry title="CoAP Option Numbers"}


This draft adds the following response code to the CoAP Response Codes registry of
{{I-D.ietf-core-coap}}:

| Code | Description                    | Reference |
|-----:+--------------------------------+----------- |
|  136 | 4.08 Request Entity Incomplete | {{&SELF}} |
{: #tab-response-code-registry title="CoAP Response Codes"}


Security Considerations
=======================

Providing access to blocks within a resource may lead to
surprising vulnerabilities.
Where requests are not implemented atomically, an attacker may be able
to exploit a race condition or confuse a server by inducing it to use
a partially updated resource representation.
Partial transfers may also make certain problematic data invisible to
intrusion detection systems; it is RECOMMENDED that an intrusion
detection system (IDS) that analyzes resource representations transferred by
CoAP implement the Block options to gain access to entire resource representations.
Still, approaches such as transferring even-numbered blocks on one path and odd-numbered
blocks on another path, or even transferring blocks multiple times
with different content and
obtaining a different interpretation of temporal order at the IDS than
at the server, may prevent an IDS from seeing the whole picture.
These kinds of attacks are well understood from IP fragmentation and
TCP segmentation; CoAP does not add fundamentally new considerations.

Where access to a resource is only granted to clients making use of a specific security
association, all blocks of that resource MUST be subject to the same
security checks; it MUST NOT be possible for unprotected exchanges to
influence blocks of an otherwise protected resource.
As a related consideration, where object security is employed,
PUT/POST should be implemented in the atomic fashion, unless the
object security operation is performed on each access and the
creation of unusable resources can be tolerated.

Mitigating Resource Exhaustion Attacks {#mitigating-exhaustion-attacks}
--------------------------------------

Certain blockwise requests may induce the server to create state, e.g. to
create a snapshot for the blockwise GET of a fast-changing resource
to enable consistent access to the same
version of a resource for all blocks, or to create temporary
resource representations that are collected until pressed into
service by a final PUT or POST with the more bit unset.
All mechanisms that induce a server to create state that cannot simply
be cleaned up create opportunities for denial-of-service attacks.
Servers SHOULD avoid being subject to resource exhaustion based on state
created by untrusted sources.
But even if this is done, the mitigation may cause a denial-of-service
to a legitimate request when it is drowned out by other state-creating
requests.
Wherever possible, servers should therefore minimize the opportunities
to create state for untrusted sources, e.g. by using stateless approaches.

Performing segmentation at the application layer is almost always
better in this respect than at the transport layer or lower (IP fragmentation,
adaptation layer fragmentation), e.g. because there is application
layer semantics that can be used for mitigation or because lower
layers provide security associations that can prevent attacks.
However, it is less common to apply timeouts and keepalive mechanisms
at the application layer than at lower layers.  Servers MAY want to
clean up accumulated state by timing it out (cf. response code 4.08), and
clients SHOULD be prepared to run blockwise transfers in an expedient
way to minimize the likelihood of running into such a timeout.

Mitigating Amplification Attacks {#mitigating-amplification-attacks}
--------------------------------

{{I-D.ietf-core-coap}} discusses the susceptibility of
CoAP end-points for use in amplification attacks.

A CoAP server can reduce the amount of amplification it provides to an
attacker by offering large resource representations only in relatively
small blocks.  With this, e.g., for a 1000 byte resource, a 10-byte request might
result in an 80-byte response (with a 64-byte block) instead of a
1016-byte response, considerably reducing the amplification provided.


Acknowledgements
================

Much of the content of this draft is the result of
discussions with the {{I-D.ietf-core-coap}} authors, and via many CoRE
WG discussions. Tokens were suggested by Gilman Tolle and refined by
Klaus Hartke.

Charles Palmer provided extensive editorial comments to a previous
version of this draft, some of which the authors hope to have covered
in this version.



--- back

Historical Note {#compat}
===============

(This appendix to be deleted by the RFC editor.)

An earlier version of this draft used a single option:

| Type | C/E      | Name  | Format | Length | Default       |
|-----:+----------+-------+--------+--------+--------------- |
|   13 | Critical | Block | uint   | 1-3 B  | 0 (see below) |


Note that this option number has since been reallocated in
{{I-D.ietf-core-coap}}; no backwards compatibility is provided after
July 1st, 2011.

--- fluff

<!--  LocalWords:  CoAP datagram CoRE WG RESTful IP ETag reassembler
-->
<!--  LocalWords:  blockwise idempotence statelessly keepalive SZX
-->
<!--  LocalWords:  acknowledgement retransmissions ACKs ACK untrusted
-->
<!--  LocalWords:  acknowledgements interoperability retransmission
-->
<!--  LocalWords:  BCP atomicity NUM WebDAV IANA
-->
